README.md, before:

# SCFS – SplitCatFS

A convenient splitting and concatenating filesystem.

## Motivation

### History

While setting up a cloud based backup and archive solution, I encountered the
following phenomenon: Many small files would get uploaded quite fast and –
depending on the actual cloud storage provider – highly concurrently, while
big files tend to slow down the whole process. The explanation is simple, many
cloud storage providers do not support concurrent or chunked uploads of a
single file, sometimes they would not even support resuming a partial upload.
You would need to upload it in one go, sequentially one byte at a time, it's
all or nothing.

Now consider a scenario, where you upload a huge file, like a mirror of your
Raspberry Pi's SD card with the system and configuration on it. I have such a
file, it is about 4 GB big. Now, while backing up my system, this was the last
file to be uploaded. According to ETA calculations, it would have taken
several hours, so I let it run overnight. The next morning I found out that
after around 95% of upload process, my internet connection vanished for just a
few seconds, but long enough for the transfer tool to abort the upload. The
temporary file got deleted from the cloud storage, so I had to start from zero
again. Several hours of uploading wasted.

I thought of a way to split big files, so that I can upload it more
efficiently, but I came to the conclusion, that manually splitting files,
uploading them, and deleting them afterwards locally, is not a very scalable
solution.

So I came up with the idea of a special filesystem. A filesystem that would
present big files as if they were many small chunks in separate files. In
reality, the chunks would all point to the same physical file, only with
different offsets. This way I could upload chunked files in parallel without
losing too much progress, even if the upload gets aborted midway.

*SplitFS* was born.

If I download such chunked file parts, I would need to call `cat * >file`
afterwards to re-create the actual file. This seems like a similar hassle like
manually splitting files. That's why I had also *CatFS* in mind, when
developing SCFS. CatFS will concatenate chunked files transparently and
present them as complete files again.

CatFS is included in SCFS since version 0.4.0.


### Why Rust?

I am relatively new to Rust and I thought, the best way to deepen my
understanding with Rust is to take on a project that would require dedication
and a certain knowledge of the language.

## Installation

SCFS can be installed easily through Cargo via `crates.io`:

```shell script
cargo install scfs
```

## Usage

### SplitFS

To mount a directory with SplitFS, use the following form:

```shell script
scfs --mode=split <base directory> <mount point>
```

Since version 0.8.0 this can be simplified by using the dedicated `splitfs`
binary:

```shell script
splitfs <base directory> <mount point>
```

The directory specified as `mount point` will now reflect the content of `base
directory`, replacing each regular file with a directory that contains
enumerated chunks of that file as separate files.

Since version 0.7.0, it is possible to use a custom block size for the file
fragments. For example, to use 1&nbsp;MB chunks instead of the default size of
2&nbsp;MB, you would go with:

```shell script
splitfs --blocksize=1048576 <base directory> <mount point>
```

Where 1048576 is 1024 * 1024, so one megabyte in bytes.

You can even leverage the calculating power of your Shell, like for example in
Bash:

```shell script
splitfs --blocksize=$((1024 * 1024)) <base directory> <mount point>
```

You can actually go as far as to set a block size of one byte, but be prepared
for a ridiculous amount of overhead or maybe even a system freeze because the
metadata table grows too large.

### CatFS

To mount a directory with CatFS, use the following form:

```shell script
scfs --mode=cat <base directory> <mount point>
```

Since version 0.8.0 this can be simplified by using the dedicated `catfs`
binary:

```shell script
catfs <base directory> <mount point>
```

Please note that `base directory` needs to be a directory structure that has
been generated by SplitFS. CatFS will refuse mounting the directory otherwise.

The directory specified as `mount point` will now reflect the content of `base
directory`, replacing each directory with chunked files in it as single files.

### Additional FUSE mount options

Since v0.8.0 it is possible to pass additional mount options to the underlying
FUSE library.

SCFS supports two ways of specifying options, either via the "-o" option, or
via additional arguments after a "--" separator. This is in accordance to
other FUSE based filesystems like EncFS.
    
These two calls are equivalent:
    
```shell script
scfs --mode=split -o nonempty mirror mountpoint
scfs --mode=split mirror mountpoint -- nonempty
```

Of course, these methods also work in the `splitfs` and `catfs` binaries.

## Limitations

I consider this project no longer a "raw prototype" and I am dog-fooding it,
meaning I use it in my own backup strategies and create features based on my
personal needs.

However, this might not meet the needs of the typical user and without
feedback I might not even think of some scenarios to begin with.

Specifically, these are the current limitations of SCFS:

-   It should work an all UNIX based systems, like Linux and maybe some MacOS
    versions, however without MacOS specific file attributes. But definitely
    not on Windows, since this would need special handling of system calls,
    which I haven't had time to care of yet.

-   It can only work with directories, regular files, and symlinks (since
    v0.8.0). Every other file types (device files, pipes, and so on) will be
    silently ignored. Since v0.8.0: Not supported file types will no longer
    result in a panic.

-   The base directory will be mounted read-only in the new mount point, and
    SCFS expects that the base directory will not be altered while mounted.

Commit message:

Add section about daemon mode

README.md, after:

# SCFS – SplitCatFS

A convenient splitting and concatenating filesystem.

## Motivation

### History

While setting up a cloud based backup and archive solution, I encountered the
following phenomenon: Many small files would get uploaded quite fast and –
depending on the actual cloud storage provider – highly concurrently, while
big files tend to slow down the whole process. The explanation is simple, many
cloud storage providers do not support concurrent or chunked uploads of a
single file, sometimes they would not even support resuming a partial upload.
You would need to upload it in one go, sequentially one byte at a time, it's
all or nothing.

Now consider a scenario, where you upload a huge file, like a mirror of your
Raspberry Pi's SD card with the system and configuration on it. I have such a
file, it is about 4 GB big. Now, while backing up my system, this was the last
file to be uploaded. According to ETA calculations, it would have taken
several hours, so I let it run overnight. The next morning I found out that
after around 95% of upload process, my internet connection vanished for just a
few seconds, but long enough for the transfer tool to abort the upload. The
temporary file got deleted from the cloud storage, so I had to start from zero
again. Several hours of uploading wasted.

I thought of a way to split big files, so that I can upload it more
efficiently, but I came to the conclusion, that manually splitting files,
uploading them, and deleting them afterwards locally, is not a very scalable
solution.

So I came up with the idea of a special filesystem. A filesystem that would
present big files as if they were many small chunks in separate files. In
reality, the chunks would all point to the same physical file, only with
different offsets. This way I could upload chunked files in parallel without
losing too much progress, even if the upload gets aborted midway.

*SplitFS* was born.

If I download such chunked file parts, I would need to call `cat * >file`
afterwards to re-create the actual file. This seems like a similar hassle like
manually splitting files. That's why I had also *CatFS* in mind, when
developing SCFS. CatFS will concatenate chunked files transparently and
present them as complete files again.

CatFS is included in SCFS since version 0.4.0.


### Why Rust?

I am relatively new to Rust and I thought, the best way to deepen my
understanding with Rust is to take on a project that would require dedication
and a certain knowledge of the language.

## Installation

SCFS can be installed easily through Cargo via `crates.io`:

```shell script
cargo install scfs
```

## Usage

### SplitFS

To mount a directory with SplitFS, use the following form:

```shell script
scfs --mode=split <base directory> <mount point>
```

Since version 0.8.0 this can be simplified by using the dedicated `splitfs`
binary:

```shell script
splitfs <base directory> <mount point>
```

The directory specified as `mount point` will now reflect the content of `base
directory`, replacing each regular file with a directory that contains
enumerated chunks of that file as separate files.

Since version 0.7.0, it is possible to use a custom block size for the file
fragments. For example, to use 1&nbsp;MB chunks instead of the default size of
2&nbsp;MB, you would go with:

```shell script
splitfs --blocksize=1048576 <base directory> <mount point>
```

Where 1048576 is 1024 * 1024, so one megabyte in bytes.

You can even leverage the calculating power of your Shell, like for example in
Bash:

```shell script
splitfs --blocksize=$((1024 * 1024)) <base directory> <mount point>
```

You can actually go as far as to set a block size of one byte, but be prepared
for a ridiculous amount of overhead or maybe even a system freeze because the
metadata table grows too large.

### CatFS

To mount a directory with CatFS, use the following form:

```shell script
scfs --mode=cat <base directory> <mount point>
```

Since version 0.8.0 this can be simplified by using the dedicated `catfs`
binary:

```shell script
catfs <base directory> <mount point>
```

Please note that `base directory` needs to be a directory structure that has
been generated by SplitFS. CatFS will refuse mounting the directory otherwise.

The directory specified as `mount point` will now reflect the content of `base
directory`, replacing each directory with chunked files in it as single files.

### Additional FUSE mount options

Since v0.8.0 it is possible to pass additional mount options to the underlying
FUSE library.

SCFS supports two ways of specifying options, either via the "-o" option, or
via additional arguments after a "--" separator. This is in accordance to
other FUSE based filesystems like EncFS.
    
These two calls are equivalent:
    
```shell script
scfs --mode=split -o nonempty mirror mountpoint
scfs --mode=split mirror mountpoint -- nonempty
```

Of course, these methods also work in the `splitfs` and `catfs` binaries.

### Daemon mode

Originally, SCFS was meant to be run in the foreground. This proved to be
annoying if one wants to use the same terminal for further work. Granted, one
could always use features of their Shell to send the process to the
background, but then you have a background process that might accidentally be
killed if the user closes terminal. Furthermore, SCFS originally did not
terminate cleanly if the user unmounted it by external means.

Since v0.9.0, SCFS natively supports daemon mode, in that the program changes
its working directory to `"/"` and then forks itself into a true daemon
process, independent of the running terminal.

```shell script
splitfs --daemon mirror mountpoint
```

Note that `mirror` and `mountpoint` are resolved *before* changing the working
directory, so they can still be given relative to the current working
directory.

To unmount, `fusermount` can be used:

```shell script
fusermount -u mountpoint
```

## Limitations

I consider this project no longer a "raw prototype" and I am dog-fooding it,
meaning I use it in my own backup strategies and create features based on my
personal needs.

However, this might not meet the needs of the typical user and without
feedback I might not even think of some scenarios to begin with.

Specifically, these are the current limitations of SCFS:

-   It should work an all UNIX based systems, like Linux and maybe some MacOS
    versions, however without MacOS specific file attributes. But definitely
    not on Windows, since this would need special handling of system calls,
    which I haven't had time to care of yet.

-   It can only work with directories, regular files, and symlinks (since
    v0.8.0). Every other file types (device files, pipes, and so on) will be
    silently ignored. Since v0.8.0: Not supported file types will no longer
    result in a panic.

-   The base directory will be mounted read-only in the new mount point, and
    SCFS expects that the base directory will not be altered while mounted.
